#summary Installing the zip file (version 1.3 or above)
#labels Featured,Phase-Deploy

= Introduction =

The PinChangeInt code is delivered in a zip file with associated examples and other code.  Here's how to install it.

= Details =
== Find the Libraries Directory (Folder) ==
Go to your Arduino's libraries folder.  If you don't know where that is, look in your Arduino IDE for the library path:  open up the Preferences menu item and look at the *Sketchbook location* entry.  The libraries path will be in the `libraries` directory beneath the Sketchbook location.

== Linux or MacOS ==
On Linux or MacOS, cd to it.  The command line `unzip` tool will properly create all subdirectories in the zip archive.
{{{
unzip /path/to/pinchangeint-v1.4.zip
}}}

== Windows ==
On Windows, open up your unzip tool- it may specify a location where you want to unzip your files.  Make sure it will unzip to the location given in the IDE.  Also make sure that you recreate full paths, if your zip tool has that option as well.

Alternatively, you can simply open up the zip archive and open another window to your Arduino libraries folder.  Then drag the PinChangeInt folder over to the libraries folder.

== Included in the Archive ==
The following files and directories are included in the archive:
{{{
PinChangeInt/PinChangeInt.h 
PinChangeInt/keywords.txt   
PinChangeInt/Examples/ByteBuffer/ByteBuffer.cpp _(version 1.70beta and above)_
PinChangeInt/Examples/ByteBuffer/ByteBuffer.h _(version 1.70beta and above)_
PinChangeInt/Examples/PinChangeIntSpeedTest/PinChangeIntSpeedTest.pde
PinChangeInt/Examples/PinChangeIntTest/PinChangeIntTest.pde _(version 1.70beta and above)_
cppfix/cppfix.h
MemoryFree/MemoryFree.cpp   
MemoryFree/MemoryFree.h
}}}
The cppfix directory is necessary only for Arduino versions prior to 1.0.  If you are using Arduino-1.0 or above, you can remove it.

The MemoryFree library is included for running speed and size tests.  If you don't want it, you can remove it.

The ByteBuffer library is included for use by the PinChangeIntTest sketch.  If you want to use that sketch, move the entire directory (folder) to the libraries directory (folder), at the same level as the PinChangeInt directory (folder).  That is, when you list the contents of the Arduino libraries folder you should see both the PinChangeInt and the ByteBuffer directories (folders).  If you want to use the ByteBuffer library, that is.

Files
{{{
PinChangeInt/PinChangeInt.cpp
PinChangeInt/PinChangeIntConfig.h
}}}
are deprecated starting in Version 1.4 and will no longer be installed.