#summary I (GreyGnome) have assigned the GPL v3 to this library. Why not LPGL, or MIT, or something less "restrictive"?

= Introduction =
 _The licenses for most software and other practical works are designed to take away your freedom to share and change the works.  By contrast, the GNU General Public License is intended to guarantee your freedom to share and change all versions of a program--to make sure it remains free software for all its users. ...  When we speak of free software, we are referring to freedom, not price._

 _-the GPL, v. 3_

I, GreyGnome, want to tell you why I chose the GPLv3 as the license for this library. Nobody has complained, nobody has asked, but nevertheless I feel the need to pontificate. Why? Because based on downloads figures I feel I have an audience. And I like to pontificate. And I like the GPL, and don't like the complaints that have been leveled at it (not by the Arduino community, mind you, but in the world as a whole).

This wiki page solely reflects the opinions of GreyGnome, aka in real life Michael Schwager. These are not the views of Lex Talionis (the other and original maintainer of PinChangeInt) or anyone else, although I'm happy to share them- as wise and reasoned as they are.

= Modifying the License =
I feel like the PinChangeInt library is pretty doggone useful and could be fundamental to operation of the Arduino platform (should you need a variety of interrupt pins). We have tried to make a library that takes much of the chore away from enabling pin change interrupts in your sketches, is flexible, and educational. Downloads in the hundreds seem to indicate that we have succeeded. If you feel that you want to utilize this library in some manner that is not compatible with the GPL, feel free to contact me at: mschwage@gmail.com. I would entertain such a request on a case-by-case basis, and address it with the other contributors to the library.

= Details =

Here's what I think.

I have put considerable thought, time, and effort into this project because it's of great interest to me. That's it. I do this for love, not money. I am a Linux Systems Administrator by day; that pays the bills. I do this for appreciation as well- my appreciation for all those who have gone before me and shared their work, so I have been able to learn UNIX, Linux, Shell, Perl, Java, C, C++, TCL/Expect, and... well I'm probably forgetting some. I am 52, after all.

You- you big, wonderful world you- have shared with me. Now I share with you. If not for the spirit of fellow enthusiasts, sharing their work, I wouldn't be half as far along in my learning and programming as I am today. Thus I'm delighted to join the milieu and share with my fellows. If I am able to knock hours or even days of time and stress from a fellow programmer's project then I'm happy.

That still doesn't cover the meat of the question: Why GPL? Two reasons. First, though I claim to share with you, I do not do so freely: I demand payment in return. That's not so strange, is it? People pay for software all the time. If you want to use Microsoft Word, for example, they demand payment using money. The GPL itself will tell you that the license does not preclude monetary payment for your work. Now I give you my work at no monetary charge. You are free to use the fruits of my labor; it makes me happy. But my payment demand goes like this: if you use my work in the form of this library to make stuff, and then want to share what you have made with the world too, as I have, then I demand that you share with me- with all of us- just as I have.

I want to play in a big sandbox with all the other kids. Ever watch toddlers in a sandbox? They share. Their parents, hovering in the background, keep an eye on them. If one little boy grabs all the toy trucks, the other little boy will demand that he share. The parents step in to reinforce this idea. We've known since before kindergarden: it's not only fun, it's only fair to share.

Second reason: because I have been using GPL'ed software since the GPL was invented in the 1980's. I began my computing career on BSD-based VAX machines in 1983. I have been enjoying others' shared work for my entire career. I like the GPL, it's been very very good to me. It's like an old friend.

Large software companies will rarely share their code with you, and even if they do you'll be made to sign all kinds of legal papers promising this and that about it. This is because they're afraid of what you'll do: Take it and use the fruits of their labor elsewhere. In effect, they're afraid that you'll steal it. These companies fear you may be a criminal.

Set aside source code for a second, even just to use the binary they make you agree to pages of legalese. For most circumstances this is of no concern; most people are just trying to create a document or what have you, so we ignore those click-through licenses and get on with it. But if you have the technical chops you are at a disadvantage. How many times have I been debugging an issue and used truss, strace, and the source code to divine the true intent of a library or system call? More times than I can count. Personally, a closed license hampers my progress by making it harder to learn a system or utility.

But I do not fear that you'll take my code and enjoy the fruits of my labor. That's precisely my intent. That's what the GPL is for. Rather I fear you may desire to distribute my code along with yours and not share with me as I've shared with you. I fear you may be a selfish brat, and no selfishness is allowed in my sendbox.

But I love you nonetheless, and offer my code to you to play with to your heart's content. If, having used my code in your project, and desiring to distribute it in the form of a new project or product, then you must share as I've shared.

Maybe you don't want to play with the other kids in the sandbox, I get it. It's fine- you can make your own sandbox, and play however you want. If you don't like my sandbox don't redistribute my code- in source or binary form. Distribute someone else's code, or write your own. If that is so horrid, remember, the only reason the issue is even at issue is because the GPL-loving author (myself, in this case) offers to you the gift of the fruits of their labors. The closed source model means we don't even get to have this conversation. Really much of the criticism of the GPL is just (as we say in English) "looking a gift horse in the mouth." It smells of sour grapes, of the kid in the sandbox grabbing all the trucks and shouting, "Mine! Mine! Mine!"

Now some johnny-come-lately's to the tech world have described the GPL as "viral", as if it's riddled with some disease. These youngsters don't realize the GPL is not an illness, it's medicine. I may take an aspirin for my headache, knowing full well that it (like any drug) comes with side effects; maybe I'll get an upset stomach. But that doesn't make aspirin a virus, any more than the GPL is "viral" towards code.  If I don't like the side effects, I don't take the aspirin. If you don't want to share your code, no problem: don't use GPL-licensed code in yours.

Make no mistake, programmers who utilize the GPL have great respect for property rights, copyright, all of the legal layers surrounding our work. We may be a bit naive about it- we're coders, after all, and have no paid legal team to guide us. Earlier this year (2012) I realized that I was using Chris J. Klick's code and redistributing it under the GPL, without his permission. I hadn't even thought about it as I was busy coding. Neither had he. But once I realized my mistake I got it cleaned up pretty quickly and he told me I was free to use his code. Programmers respect and appreciate each other's work, and I wanted to respect Chris'. It was his, after all. So I cleared the air.

If I were ignorant, careless, or just disrespectful about copyrights I may have placed the work in the public domain, or ignored the issue entirely. But that's not how users of the GPL roll: we are deliberate in the use of the license, in its ramifications, and in its power. The GPL is a legal document with teeth, no less so than any click-through license, and it is wielded the same as any other legal tool. For anyone to claim otherwise is itself disrespectful.

One final point. In Craig Mundie's famous speech https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/news/exec/craig/05-03sharedsource.aspx he declared,
 ...open source software based on the GPL mirrors the .com business models that proved the least successful during the past year _(2001- ed)_. They ask software developers to give away for free the very thing they create that is of greatest value in the hope that somehow theyll make money selling something else. In effect, it puts at risk the continued vitality of the independent software sector. ... But as history has shown, while this type of model may have a place, it isnt successful in building a mass market and making powerful, easy-to-use software broadly accessible to consumers.

At the risk of sounding shrill, I ask: What in the entire flock of seagulls was this guy jabbering about? At the time of his writing, 2001, the GPL was over a decade old! The open source model, was- what, already 40 years old? I learned UNIX starting with BSD 4 back in 1983. The GPL was alive and well in 2001, it was alive and well in the 1980's, and it's alive and well today. As the premier license in the world of open source, the GPL asks software developers if they want to give with freedom the very thing they create that is of greatest value in the belief that their contribution will join the contributions of millions of others in creating a more interesting, vibrant, and enjoyable world. What, is this guy's measuring stick labelled only in dollars? It must be why he's so myopic.

Speaking of history, buddy boy, have you ever heard of this little thing called the Internet? It wasn't built by the Microsofts or Apples of the world. It was built by researchers and grad students hunkered in front of their terminals doing really interesting work. I remember the days when you could count the .coms on one hand. Those were the days of the .edus and nobody gave a rat's patootie about monetizing the blasted thing- hell, it wasn't even on Microsoft's radar. What history has shown is that passionate, dedicated people can build powerful environments that would put the closed source mass marketeers to shame. That the GPL "put at risk the continued vitality of the independent software sector" was well past ignorant then and remains ignorant today (should he or anyone else remain confused). At work I run 500 servers- each one fully subscribed and paid-up to a billion-dollar corporation; I'm talking, of course, about RedHat Enterprise Linux. If Linux is not enough of a mass market, what is? How about Android? It's not GPL, but I notice that those software developers give it away for free. I don't see the continued vitality of the independent software sector in any sort of risk because of any open source license.

I said in the beginning: It's possible that this code could be distributed under a dual license. I'm not against copyrights nor even closed source licensing, per se. It's the way of the world, after all. What I'm saying I wish to make clear: At its heart this is a dissertation outlining what I am very much for, and that is the Gnu Public License, version 3 or (at your option) any later version :-). I daresay that without it you, intrepid programmer, would not be here (on so many levels) reading this- and neither would I. So it is with the greatest respect, appreciation, and yes even love that I license this library under the GPL.